---
layout: post
title:  "Data Loss"
date:   2023-12-06 21:56:00 +0200
categories: raspberrypi coding
---

The theme of this post is data loss. The post is in fact a celebration of being able to post at all, as for 2-3 weeks the raspberry pi I host this site on was down! I shall tell the long, winding, and amateurish tale of my attempts to revive it, involving side quests to the lands of "google drive", "ubuntu" and, improbably, "baidu wangpan".

### SD Card shenanigans
Where my SD card breaks, I cannot read the files, and hurriedly back it up onto my SSD

### Everything is breaking; calling backup
Where I go to Fust to buy a new SD card, and at microspot I find a new dongle

### Interlude into the baidu cloud; Three chinese sorcerers
My chinese contact comes through. Time is however limited! I scurry to download the files on a 3 day deadline. Baidu sucks but Mama and Qian come to the rescue.

### Enter Ubuntu and GParted; A wise sage speaks
Internet and GPT advises to use linux to recover the files. I have a spare thumbdrive, and vaguely remember booting laptops off Ubuntu. Steven does a minor assist on partitions.


### Pi-oenix rises from the ashes
Nginx conf is lost to the sands of time, but the Pi will live again.

### Data is backed up, but at what cost? (google drive)
With thoughts of the impermanence of data, and realising the 7GB RAM weight of GDrive, I reorganise my online footprint. Rclone rears its head but seems impotent.

### A final twist of the blade
I start to write this blog post, VScode remote breaks for unknown reasons, I must start again.

### The weary hero returns home
Somethings were lost. Somethings were recovered. Somethings were learnt. Somethings were changed for the better. The kingdom is at peace again, for now...
