---
layout: post
title:  "Writing for writing's sake"
date:   2024-01-19 10:51:00 +0200
categories: fun_blog writing
---

I just read a short essay yesterday on "Lessons for a Young Writer". I don't see myself as a young writer, but it still gave me a little inspiration/motivation boost, and after all I started this blog partly to practice writing, for self-betterment and enjoyment. I started typing these words with no plan in my head but just the intention to open a document and start writing. Unfortunately a level of polish is still required, and I will not pretend that the end written product was a direct brain to screen dump from start to finish. My initial momentum to plough ahead is already fading and being replaced by the urge to edit and re-structure/plan.

The problem with having no pre-conceived plan is that writing seems to become an internal power struggle between different factions with different goals and priorities. Each wishes to seize control of the narrative, redirect the writing, or to rehash or remove the past paragraph to swing the piece in a different direction. With a set plan, writing is rather mainly an optimisation problem of how to convey this overall message/story in the best way. Yes there may be some re-writing, but the base story doesn't change much, e.g. my previous posts have detailed real things that I did.

In the "Lessons for a Young Writer", the author describes setting out to write a piece of fiction, where the first third of the story will necessarily have to be discarded and rewritten. Presumably by the time that the first pass of the whole story is finished, the direction of the whole narrative will have shifted so much from the initial conception that the beginning will be out of place in the context of the end goal. 

Reading this essay, detailing the long, hard process of the aspiring writer necessary to hone their craft, I was both impressed by breadth and depth of the listed important writing skills "reread up on grammar at least every 2 years" etc., but also wondered that in this new age of GPTs and LLMs, whether the "art"/skill of good writing might be lost to a great proportion of people. 

Since specialising into the math and engineering side of things in high school, my written output has been curtailed. In early middle school I used to write fiction stories once a week for English class. I vividly remember spending the whole commute back from school fantasizing and planning my short fiction story of the week, excited to think of a fun plot. In later middle school I wrote homework essays analysing aspects of the novel/play we studied in class (English), or arguing for the cause behind a historical episode (History). These tasks I think I found a bit more frustrating and arbitrary - I remember asking myself why did I get a bad mark on this English essay, what exactly could/should I have done better? Presumably using more descriptive/interesting language, spinning a more nuanced analysis etc., yet I probably felt a little that my efforts would be wasted. I remember the report card of my history teacher (quite fond memories) praising my "idiosyncratic" writing style, but noting that I would still do better to try to conform to the standard / recommended writing structure (paragraphs like: introduction, on one hand, on the other hand, further inspection of important factor, conclusion). I think the narrowing of focus to writing in a particular way, and aiming for high marks had me less motivated and engaged in the whole business. I think I stressed out about inorganically learning all the important dates and events in History, and English I almost shunned from my mind where possible, so unsure I was as to how this subject was meant to be studied and learnt. The end result was that, of all my end of middle school exam marks, English Language and English Literature were the only subjects I didn't get the highest A* grade in.

In high school, bachelor's and master's, my writing has been irregular and poor. There have been many speedily typed emails (messy, little to no editing), and a few technical writing endeavours like project reports, theses, academic papers, where a high degree of polish is attained, but the scope and style of writing is very constrained by the technical content. Probably the only standalone "good" writing has been a few highly crafted application or motivation letters, although they mostly just rehash my background and research goals/desires. The only notable piece I can think of was for a master's at TUM I had to write an essay on a scientific topic - I chose Occam's Razor.

I can only speak for myself and what I perceive of people like me, but with the advent of LLM's I imagine that what little good writing we now do will be even further diminished by the fast and easy editing abilities of Chat GPT. An application essay that had used to take 3 hours of drafting, editing and refining can now be done with a quick 15 minute splurge of the key info in bullet point form, to be written up in proper style by Chat GPT. Writing well is difficult and multifaceted, and so if people don't practice this skill it will surely become even more so - it's not like riding a bike (easy once learnt). And if it is already hard and tedious, all the more reason to avoid it as much possible by using AI instead. At least we won't lose all language abilities (at least until brain computer interfaces become a big thing), as talking and importantly reading will still be irreplaceable as a means of communicating knowledge. These will definitely assuage our ability to write's decline, however maybe not enough as I fear these skills are still quite distinct. For instance communicating my meaning by speech feels so fast and easy, whereas writing is much slower and more painful, agonising often over individual words. That reading and writing are quite different is also clear - a slick paragraph can be read in 20 seconds, though it may take 20 minutes to write. At least the end medium is the same, and there is hope that if you can recognise someone else's good writing (by reading it), then you will at least know when what you yourself have produced is of good quality. Let's just hope that we won't have to wait for our brain to produce that one good formulation as if we were waiting for a monkey on a typewriter to write Shakespeare!